# $File: //depot/cpanplus/cpanplus-smoke/lib/CPANPLUS/TesterGuide.pod $
# $Revision: #2 $ $Change: 11751 $ $DateTime: 2004/12/26 16:05:10 $

=head1 NAME

CPANPLUS::TesterGuide - Becoming a CPAN Tester with CPANPLUS

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 # This is an article, not a module.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The following article first appeared in I<perl.com>.

=head2 Introduction

In I<CPANPLUS -- Like CPAN.pm only better?> [1], Jos Boumans recounted
the tale of how his B<CPANPLUS> project came to be; one of the original
goals was to provide a modular backend to I<CPANTS>, the CPAN Testing
Service, so modules can be automatically built and tested on multiple
platforms.

Although the initial B<CPANPLUS> release did not support testing-related
features, Jos considered them important enough to be listed near the top
of his I<Current and Future Developments> wish list, and quoted Michael
Schwern's opinion on their potential benefits [2]:

 It would alter the way free software is distributed.
 It would get a mark of quality; it would be tested and
 reviewed.  And gosh darnit, it would be good.

At that time, despite having participated in CPANPLUS's development for
more than four months, I was blissfully unaware of the project's
original vision.  But it seemed like a worthwhile goal to pursue, so I
quickly jotted down several pieces that need to work together:

=over 4

=item *

Check test reports of modules before installation.

=item *

Report C<make test> results to the author, and make them available
for other users to check.

=item *

Tools to batch-test modules with or without human intervention.

=item *

A clean API for other programs to perform tests, reporting and queries.

=back

Today, with the 0.050 release of B<CPANPLUS>, all the above pieces are
available.  This article will show you how to configure and use these
tools, as well as describing some important new features in B<CPANPLUS>
that made them possible.

=head2 Setting up the environment

First, install B<CPANPLUS::Smoke> (and its dependencies) from CPAN.

Since Jos's article and README already contained install instructions,
I will not repeat the details here.

=head2 Why is testing important?

What if, instead of C<All tests successful>, you see a series of cryptic
messages:

 % sudo make test
 /usr/bin/perl Makefile.PL --config=-target,skiptest
 --installdeps=Term::Size,0.01
 *** Installing dependencies...
 *** Installing Term::Size...
 Can't bless non-reference value at lib/CPANPLUS/Internals/Module.pm
 line 239.
 Compilation failed in require at Makefile.PL line 20.
 make: *** [installdeps] Error 255

An experienced Perl user will probably take the following steps:

=over 4

=item *

Look at F<lib/CPANPLUS/Internals/Module.pm> and see if it's a trivial
mistake.  Unfortunately, it is not.

=item *

Search README for the project's mailing list address.  Discovering that
it's hosted in SourceForge, check Geocrawler (or any search engine) for
existing bug reports and discussions.  Unfortunately, there are none.

=item *

Copy-and-paste the error message into a bug-reporting email to the
mailing list, including your operating system name and version, perl
version, and wait for a fix.

=back

Apparently, the above is exactly what Jorrit Waalboer (the bug's
original reporter) did when he ran into this trouble.  Thanks, Jorrit!

However, there are a number of problems with the procedure above.
It might be thwarted at every step:

=over 4

=item *

What if Jorrit had been less experienced, and unaware of this
bug-reporting procedure?

=item *

What if he decided to kluge around it by commenting out line 239,
instead of taking the laborious copy-and-paste path to report it?

=item *

B<CPANPLUS> has a mailing list; other modules might not.  Worse, they
may not even have a working contact address -- maybe the author is on
vacation.  (Note that this problem is somewhat alleviated by the
CPAN Bug Tracking service at L<http://rt.cpan.org/>, used by CPANPLUS
and many others.)

=item *

He might not have the sense to provide adequate debug-related data,
and simply wrote C<CPANPLUS didn't work! It can't install!#!@#@#!>
in red-colored blinking HTML email, wasting bandwidth and causing
developers to ignore his mail completely.

=item *

Even after a fix is made available, and posted as a patch on the
mailing list, other people about to install B<CPANPLUS> 0.03 still
have no way to find out about it beforehand.  Thus, when the same
problem occurs again, they may forget to search in the archives,
resulting in duplicate bug reports, or (worse) more dissatisfied
users.

=item *

Actually, we had not mentioned the very likely scenario: what if
Jorrit didn't run C<make test> at all? If so, the developers will
have no way to know that this bug has ever happened.

=item *

Finally, while B<CPANPLUS> (like most CPAN modules) includes a
regression test suite, some modules may omit their tests altogether.
Users may not feel comfortable to mail the author to request a test
script to accompany the distribution; consequently, bugs will surface
in harder-to-detect ways, and may never get fixed.

=back

As you can see, both authors and users can certainly benefit a lot
from an improved test reporting system -- one that simplifies the
process of reporting a failed (or successful) installation, and lets
users check for existing reports before downloading a module.

Such a system already exists; it's called I<CPAN Testers>.

=head2 What is I<CPAN Testers>?

When most people run C<make test>, it's immediately followed by a
C<make install>; that is, people only test modules that they are going
to use.  But they may not have the time or inclination to report the
outcome, for various reasons listed above.

I<CPAN Testers> (L<http://testers.cpan.org/>) is an effort to set up a
I<Quality Assurance> (I<QA>) team for CPAN modules.  As its homepage
states:

 The objective of the group is to test as many of the
 distributions on CPAN as possible, on as many platforms
 as possible.

 The ultimate goal is to improve the portability of the
 distributions on CPAN, and provide good feedback to the
 authors.

Central to its operation is a mailing list, F<cpan-testers@perl.org>,
and a small program, F<cpantest>.  The program is a convenient way to
report a distribution's test result, which is sent to the mailing list
using an uniform format.  For example:

 # test passed, send a report automatically (no comments)
 cpantest -g pass -auto -p CPANPLUS-0.032
 # test failed, launch an editor to edit the report, and cc to kane
 cpantest -g fail -p CPANPLUS-0.032 kane@cpan.org

The argument (C<pass>/C<fail>) after the B<-g> option is called the
I<grade> -- the overall result of a test run.  It may also be C<na>
(not available), which means the module is not expected to work on this
platform at all (B<Win32::Process> on FreeBSD, for example), and
C<unknown> in the case that no tests are provided in the distribution.

All recent CPAN uploads, as well as all test results, are forwarded
to the C<cpan-testers> mailing list's subscribers -- CPAN testers.
After a distribution's release on CPAN, one or more testers will
pick it up, test it, then feed the result back to the author and to
the list.  The testers don't have to know what the module is about;
all they do is to ensure it's working as advertised.

Test reports on the mailing list are automatically recorded in a
ever-growing database.  L<http://testers.cpan.org/search?request=search>
is its search interface, where you can query by distribution name,
version, or the testing platform.

Theoretically, you can query that database before installing any CPAN
module, to see if it works on your platform, and check for associated
bug reports.  The same information is also present at each module's
page in L<http://search.cpan.org/>, and maybe L<http://rt.cpan.org/>
in the near future.

Alas, while this system certainly works, it is far from perfect.  Here
are some of its shortcomings:

=over 4

=item *

The integration between website and mailing list hadn't extended to the
F<CPAN.pm> shell, so checking for test results requires an additional
step to navigate the web browser.

=item *

People who aren't subscribed to the C<cpan-testers> list rarely submit
test reports, so coverage of platforms is limited to a few popular ones;
a heavily-used module may still be tested in only 2 or 3 platforms,
hardly representing its entire user base.

=item *

There are no I<smoking> (automatic cross-platform testing) mechanisms;
all testers must manually fetch, extract, test and submit their test
reports, including the same copy-and-paste toil we described earlier.
This entry barrier has seriously limited the number of active volunteer
testers.

=back

Fortunately, B<CPANPLUS> addressed most of these issues, and made it
significantly easier to participate in testing-related activities.
Let's walk through them in the following sections.

=head2 Checking test reports

CPANPLUS offers a straightforward way to check existing reports.
Simply enter C<cpanp -c I<ModuleName>> in the command line:

 % cpanp -c CPANPLUS
 [/K/KA/KANE/CPANPLUS-0.032.tar.gz]
 PASS freebsd 4.5-release i386-freebsd

As you can see, this reports the most recent version of B<CPANPLUS>,
which passed its tests on FreeBSD as of this writing.

You can also specify a particular version of some distribution.  For
example, the version Jorrit was having problems with is 0.03, so he
can do this:

 % cpanp -c CPANPLUS-0.03
 [/K/KA/KANE/CPANPLUS-0.03.tar.gz]
     FAIL freebsd 4.2-stable i386-freebsd (*)
     PASS freebsd 4.5-release i386-freebsd (*)
     PASS linux 2.2.14-5.0 i686-linux
 ==> http://testers.cpan.org/search?request=dist&dist=CPANPLUS

As you can see, there are three reports, two of which contain
additional details (marked with C<*>), available at the URL listed
above.  The failed one's says:

 This bug seems to be present in machines upgrading to 0.03
 from 0.01/0.02 releases.
 (It has since been fixed in the upcoming 0.031 release.)

Which exactly addressed Jorrit's original problem.

Another useful trick is using the C<o> command in the CPANPLUS
Shell to list newer versions of installed modules on CPAN, and
check on them all with C<c *>:

 % cpanp
 CPAN Terminal> o
 1   0.14     0.15   DBD::SQLite        MSERGEANT
 2   2.1011   2.1014 DBD::mysql         JWIED

 CPAN Terminal> c *
 [/M/MS/MSERGEANT/DBD-SQLite-0.15.tar.gz]
     FAIL freebsd 4.5-release i386-freebsd (*)
     PASS linux 2.2.14-5.0 i686-linux
     PASS solaris 2.8 sun4-solaris
 ==> http://testers.cpan.org/search?request=dist&dist=DBD-SQLite

 [/J/JW/JWIED/DBD-mysql-2.1014.tar.gz]
     FAIL freebsd 4.5-release i386-freebsd (*)
     PASS freebsd 4.5-release i386-freebsd
 ==> http://testers.cpan.org/search?request=dist&dist=DBD-mysql

This way, you can safely upgrade your modules, confident in the
knowledge that the newer version won't break the system.

=head2 Reporting test results

Despite the handy utility of the C<c> command, there will be no reports
if nobody submits them.  B<CPANPLUS> lets you send a report whenever
you've done a C<make test> in the course of installing a module; to
enable this feature, please turn on the C<cpantest> configuration
variable:

 CPAN Terminal> s cpantest 1
 CPAN Terminal> s save
 Your CPAN++ configuration info has been saved!

Afterwards, just use CPANPLUS as usual.  You will be prompted during an
installation, like below:

 CPAN Terminal> i DBD::SQLite
 Installing: DBD::SQLite
 # ...
 t/30insertfetch....ok
 t/40bindparam......FAILED test 25
     Failed 1/28 tests, 96.43% okay
 t/40blobs..........dubious
     Test returned status 2 (wstat 512, 0x200)
     DIED.  FAILED tests 8-11
     Failed 4/11 tests, 63.64% okay
 Failed 2/19 test scripts, 89.47% okay.
 5/250 subtests failed, 98.00% okay.
 *** Error code 9
 Report DBD-SQLite-0.15's testing result (FAIL)? [y/N]: y

It always defaults to C<n>, so you won't send out bogus reports by
mistake.  If you enter C<y>, different actions will happen, depending
on the test's outcome:

=over 4

=item *

For modules that passed their tests, a C<pass> report is sent out
immediately to the C<cpan-testers> list.

=item *

For modules that didn't define a test, an C<unknown> report is sent to
the author and C<cpan-testers>; the report will include a simple test
script, encourage the module author to include it in the next release,
and contain a URL of Michael Schwern's B<Test::Tutorial> manpage.

=item *

If the module fails at any point (C<perl Makefile.PL>, C<make>, or
C<make test>), the default editor is launched to edit its C<fail>
report, which includes the point of failure and the captured error
buffer.

You are free to add any text below the C<Additional comments> line;
to cancel a report, just delete everything and save an empty file.

=back

Before sending out a C<fail> report, be sure to double-check if it is
really the module's problem.  For example, if there's no I<libgtk>
on your system, please don't send a report about failing to install
B<Gtk>.

Also, be prepared to follow up with additional information when asked.
The author may ask you to apply some patches, or to try out an
experimental release; do help the author whenever you can.

=head2 Batch Testing and F<cpansmoke>

While regular users can test modules as they install via the C<cpantest>
option, and often provide important first-hand troubleshooting
information, we still need dedicated testers -- they can broaden the
coverage of available platforms, and may uncover problems previously
unforeseen by the author.  Dedicated testing and regular reports are
complementary to each other.

Historically, CPAN testers would watch for notices of recent I<PAUSE>
uploads posted on the C<cpan-testers> list, grab them, test them
manually, and run the F<cpantest> script, as we've seen in
L</What is I<CPAN Testers>?>.  That script is bundled with B<CPANPLUS>;
please refer to its POD documentation for additional options.  
    
However, normally you won't be using it directly, as B<CPANPLUS> offers
the F<cpansmoke> wrapper, which consolidates the I<download =E<gt> test
=E<gt> copy buffer =E<gt> run cpantest =E<gt> file report> procedure into
a single command (with F<cpantest> replaced by B<Test::Reporter>):

 % cpansmoke Mail::Audit Mail::SpamAssassin          # by module
 % cpansmoke Mail-Audit-2.1 Mail-SpamAssassin-2.20   # by distname
 % cpansmoke /S/SI/SIMON/Mail-Audit-2.1.tar.gz       # or full name

Due to the need of testing new distributions as they are uploaded,
F<cpansmoke> will use L<http://www.cpan.org/> as its primary host,
instead of the local mirror configured in your B<CPANPLUS> settings.
This behaviour may be overridden with the B<-l> flag.

Since F<cpansmoke> will stop right after C<make test> rather than
installing any modules, it can test modules with different versions
than the ones installed on the system.  However, since it won't
resolve prerequisites by default, you'll need to specify the B<-p>
flag to test and report them.

The B<-d> flag will display previous results before testing each module;
similarly, B<-s> will skip testing altogether if the module was already
tested on the same platform.  The latter should only be used with
automated test (to reduce spamming), since the same platform can have
different results.

There are numerous other flags available; please consult F<cpansmoke>'s
manpage for further information.

=head2 Automatic Testing

Besides interactive batch-testing, F<cpansmoke> also provides the
capability of I<unattended testing>; this concept is also covered by
Mozilla Project's B<Tinderbox> toolkit, as explained in its homepage:

 There is a flock of dedicated build machines that do
 nothing but continually check out the source tree and
 build it, over and over again. 

Essentially, if you have a machine with plenty of hard disk space and
adequate bandwidth, you can set F<cpansmoke> up so it tests each and
every new module as it is uploaded.

The B<-a> option lets F<cpansmoke> enter the non-interactive mode.  In
this mode, only failures during C<make test> are reported, because
errors that occured during C<Makefile.PL> or C<make> are more likely
the machine's problem, not the module's.

Additionally, you should specify the F<-s> flag to avoid duplicate
reports, and F<-p> to avoid false-negatives caused by unsatisfied
dependencies.

Setting up an auto-smoking machine is very simple, using a mail
filtering mechanism; just join the CPAN Testers list by sending an
empty email to F<cpan-testers-subscribe@perl.org>, and add the lines
below to your B<Mail::Audit> filter [4]:

 fork || exec("sleep 40000 && cpansmoke -aps $1 >/dev/null 2>&1")
     if $mail->subject =~ /^CPAN Upload: ([-./\w]+)$/;

This rule will fork out a new F<cpansmoke> process for each incoming
mail about a CPAN upload.  Note that it works only if incoming mail
arrives no less than once every hour; otherwise it might fork-bomb your
system to a grinding halt.

In case you're wondering, the C<sleep 40000> line is due to the fact
that a PAUSE upload needs several hours to appear on I<www.cpan.org>.
Michael Schwern suggested that using a I<smoke queue> would be a better
solution, since it allows error-checking and logging; implementations
are welcome.

If you are stuck with B<procmail>, here's the recipe that does the same
(but do consider upgrading to B<Mail::Audit>):

 :0hc
 * ^Subject: CPAN Upload:
 |sh -c "sleep 40000 && grep Subject|cut -f4 -d' '|xargs cpansmoke -aps >/dev/null 2>&1"

If you have suggestions on how to make this work on non-unix systems,
please do let me know.

=head2 Testing-related APIs

A programmable interface is the primary strength of B<CPANPLUS>.  All
features listed above are available as separate methods of the
B<CPANPLUS::Backend> object.  Since the module's manpage already
contains detailed information, I'll just list some sample snippets
below.

To show all reports of B<Acme::*> on FreeBSD:

 use CPANPLUS::Backend;
 my $cp = CPANPLUS::Backend->new;
 my $reports = $cp->reports( modules => [ map $_->{package}, values(
     %{ $cp->search(type => 'module', list => ['^Acme::\b']) }
 ) ] );

 while ( my ($name, $href) = each (%$reports) ) {
     next unless $href;
     my @entries = grep { $_->{platform} =~ /\bfreebsd\b/ } @$href;
     next unless @entries;

     print "[$name]\n";
     for my $rv (@entries) {
         printf "%8s %s%s\n", @{$rv}{'grade', 'platform'},
                              ($rv->{detail} ? ' (*)' : '');
     }
 }

To test all B<Acme::*> modules, but install all needed prerequisites:

 use CPANPLUS::Backend;
 my $cp = CPANPLUS::Backend->new;
 $cp->configure_object->set_conf( cpantest => 1 );
 $cp->install(
     modules => [ map $_->{package}, values(
         %{ $cp->search(type => 'module', list => ['^Acme::\b']) }
     ) ], 
     target        => 'test',
     prereq_target => 'install',
 );

If you need to fine-tune various aspects during testing (timeout,
prerequisite handling, etc.), please consult the source code of
F<cpansmoke>; most tricks involved are documented in comments.

=head2 Conclusion

As I<purl> said, "CPAN is a cultural mechanism." [5] It is not an
abstraction filled with code, but rather depends on people caring enough
to share code, as well as sharing useful feedback in order to improve
each other's code.

With the advent of bug-tracking services [6] and automatic testing,
the social collaboration aspect of CPAN has been greatly extended, and
could be developed further into a full-featured Tinderbox system, or
linked with each module's source-control repositories.

Also, since B<CPANPLUS> is designed to accommodate different package
formats and distribution systems, it provides a solid foundation for
projects like B<Module::Build> (C<make>-less installation), B<NAPC>
(distributed CPAN) and B<ExtUtils::AutoInstall> (feature-based
dependency probing)... the possibilities are staggering, and you
certainly won't be disappointed in finding an interesting project to
work on.  Happy hacking!

=head2 Acknowledgements

Although I have done some modest work in integrating B<CPANPLUS> with
CPAN testing, the work is really built on contributions from several
brilliant individuals:

First, I'd like to dedicate this article to Elaine -HFB- Ashton, for
her tireless efforts on perl advocacy, and for sponsoring my works as
described in this article.

Thanks also goes to Graham Barr and Chris Nandor, for establishing the
CPAN Testers at the first place, and coming up with two other important
cultural mechanisms: I<CPAN Search> and I<Use Perl;> respectively.

To Jos Boumans, Joshua Boschert, Ann Barcomb and everybody in
the B<CPANPLUS> team -- you guys rock!  Special thanks for another
team member, Michael Schwern, for reminding everybody constantly
that I<Kwalitee Is Job One>.

To Paul Schinder, the greatest tester of all time, who submitted
10551 reports by hand out of 23203 to date, and kept CPAN Testers alive
for a long time.  And thanks for every fellow CPAN Tester who have
committed their valuable time -- I hope F<cpansmoke> can shoulder your
burden a little bit.

To Simon Cozens, for his swiss-nuke B<Mail::Audit> module, and for
keep asking me to write 'something neat' for I<perl.com>. :-)

To Jarkko Hietaniemi, for establishing B<CPAN>; and to Andreas J.
Koenig, for maintaining B<PAUSE> and showing us what is possible
with B<CPAN.pm>.

Finally, if you decide to follow the steps in this article and
participate in the testing process, then you have my utmost gratitude;
let's make the world a better place.

=head2 Footnotes

=over 4

=item 1

It's an introductory text for the B<CPANPLUS> project, available at
L<http://www.perl.com/pub/a/2002/03/26/cpanplus.html>.

=item 2

Jos later confessed that these are not exactly Schwern's words; he just
made the quote up for dramatic effects.

=item 3

With ActivePerl on Windows, simply replace all C<make> with C<nmake>.
If you don't have F<nmake.exe> in your C<%PATH>, our F<Makefile.PL> is
smart enough to fetch and install it for you.

=item 4

See L<http://simon-cozens.org/writings/mail-audit.html> for instruction
on setting up B<Mail::Audit>.

=item 5

Purl, the magnet #perl infobot, is also a cultural mechanism herself;
see L<http://www.infobot.org/> for additional information.

=item 6

That's Jesse Vincent's L<http://rt.cpan.org/>, which tracks bugs in
every distribution released through CPAN.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<CPANPLUS>, L<Mail::Audit>, L<Test::Tutorial>

The L<cpanp>, L<cpansmoke> and L<cpantest> utilities

=head1 AUTHORS

Autrijus Tang E<lt>autrijus@autrijus.orgE<gt>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

This article is (c) 2002 by Autrijus Tang.  You may redistribute and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut

# Local variables:
# c-indentation-style: bsd
# c-basic-offset: 4
# indent-tabs-mode: nil
# End:
# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
